Improve modref docs (#1256)
kadena-io/pact: docs/en/pact-reference.md

Module References {#modrefs}
---

Pact 3.7 introduces module references (also called "modrefs"), a new language

> feature that enables important use-cases that require polymorphism. For example,

Reviewer: Since the primary reader is not a Haskeller, I doubt this terminology would be clarifying in any way.

> feature that enables important use-cases that require polymorphism. For example,

Reviewer 2: I agree; I suggest we even go a step further and quickly specify how module references work (even though the example goes into more detail). For example, a quick sentence:

```suggestion
feature that enables important use-cases that require polymorphism. Specifically, module references allow Pact code to use functions, values, and capabilities as defined in a particular interface and defer choosing a concrete implementation from a particular module. Instead of using the `coin.transfer-create` function directly, for example, Pact code can use the `transfer-create` function from _any_ module that implements the `fungible-v2` interface. Consider
```

a Uniswap-like DEX allows users to specify pairs of tokens to allow trading
between them. The `fungible-v2` interface allows tokens to offer identical
operations such as `transfer-create`, but without a way to abstract over
different `fungible-v2` implementations, a DEX smart contract would have to be
upgraded for each pair with custom code for every operation.

With module references, the DEX can now accept pairs of modref values where each
value references a concrete module that implements the `fungible-v2` interface,
giving it the ability to call `fungible-v2` operations using those values. The
refmod values are "normal Pact values" that can be stored in the database,
referenced in events and returned from functions.

### Modrefs and Polymorphism

> Modrefs provide polymorphism for use cases like this with an emphasis on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Modrefs provide polymorphism for use cases, such as the DEX example above, with an emphasis on
```

interoperability. A modref is specified with one or more interfaces, allowing
for values of that modref to reference modules that implement those

> interfaces. So, for example, a modref that specifies `fungible-v2` accepts a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
interfaces. For example, a modref that specifies `fungible-v2` accepts a
```

reference to the Kadena `coin` KDA token module, because `coin` implements
`fungible-v2`. Of course there is nothing special about `fungible-v2`: modrefs
can specify any defined interface and accept any module that implements said
interface. In this way, modrefs bring polymorphism to Pact.

To programmers coming from polymorphic languages like Javascript, Java or
Python, module references seem familiar. However, Pact is very much not
object-oriented so there are important differences in how polymorphism works and
what it is best used for.

A key difference is that while modrefs allow polymorphism over modules, they
don't offer polymorphism over data. Modules in Pact are not data in any
practical sense: not only are they "code only", but they cannot be dynamically
created within the Pact system. Meanwhile, data stored in the database is
managed using schemas, which have no polymorphic features via modrefs or any
other mechanism. This is why we suggest modrefs are more about "interoperation"

> instead of polymorphism per se, avoiding the OO connotation of "objects changing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
instead of polymorphism per se, avoiding the object oriented connotation of "objects changing
```

shape".

> Additionally, programmers should resist the urge to employ other OO-centric

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, programmers should resist the urge to employ other object oriented centric
```

patterns using modrefs. A popular idea of "coding around interfaces, not
implementations" is actually harmful in Pact if polymorphism is not
needed. Programmers should prefer direct references whenever possible as they

> are not only faster but safer, as Pact aggressively and permanently inlines all

Reviewer 3: And cheaper wrt gas?

Author: Not currently.

Module References {#modrefs}
---

Pact 3.7 introduces module references (also called "modrefs"), a new language
feature that enables important use-cases that require polymorphism. For example,
a Uniswap-like DEX allows users to specify pairs of tokens to allow trading
between them. The `fungible-v2` interface allows tokens to offer identical
operations such as `transfer-create`, but without a way to abstract over
different `fungible-v2` implementations, a DEX smart contract would have to be
upgraded for each pair with custom code for every operation.

> ```lisp

Reviewer 4: I think you can now use ` ```pact` instead

Reviewer 3: @EnoF I thought so as well but we use the MD files to generate read the docs documentation which is not aware of pact...

      ((= "KDA" b-token)
       (coin.transfer b-pair-account b-account b-amount))
      ((= "KBTC" b-token)
       (kbtc.ledger.transfer b-pair-account b-account b-amount))
      ((= "KUSD" b-token)
       (kusd.ledger.transfer b-pair-account b-account b-amount))
      "Unrecognized b-token value"))
)
```

With module references, the DEX can now accept pairs of modref values where each
value references a concrete module that implements the `fungible-v2` interface,
giving it the ability to call `fungible-v2` operations using those values.

```
;;; simplified DEX example with modref dynamic dispatch
(defun swap
  ( a-token:module{fungible-v2} a-amount:decimal a-account:string
    b-token:module{fungible-v2} b-amount:decimal b-account:string
  )
  (with-read pair-accounts (format "{}:{}" [a-token b-token])
    { 'pair-a-account := pair-a-account
    , 'pair-b-account := pair-b-account
    }
    (a-token::transfer a-account pair-a-account a-amount)
    (b-token::transfer pair-b-account b-account b-amount))
)
```

To invoke the above function, the module names are directly referenced in code.

```lisp

(swap coin a-amount a-account
      kbtc.ledger b-amount b-account)

```

> The refmod values are "normal Pact values" that can be stored in the database,

Reviewer 2: This is the first I'm seeing "refmod" — is this meant to be "modref"?

Reviewer 2: The scare quotes here indicate it may be useful to link to the section that explains why this is in scare quotes, e.g. "(see [Modrefs and Polymorphism]() for details)"

Author: naw that's just a typo :)

referenced in events and returned from functions.

```
;;; simplified DEX example with stored pair modrefs
(defun swap
  ( pair-symbol:string
    a-amount:decimal a-account:string
    b-amount:decimal b-account:string
  )
  (with-read pair-accounts pair-symbol
    { 'pair-a-account := pair-a-account:string
    , 'a-token := a-token:module{fungible-v2}
    , 'pair-b-account := pair-b-account:string
    , 'b-token := b-token:module{fungible-v2}
    }
    (a-token::transfer a-account pair-a-account a-amount)
    (b-token::transfer pair-b-account b-account b-amount))
)
```

### Modrefs and Polymorphism

Modrefs provide polymorphism for use cases like the example above with an emphasis on
interoperability. A modref is specified with one or more interfaces, allowing
for values of that modref to reference modules that implement those
interfaces.

In the calling example above, the modref `a-token:module{fungible-v2}` accepts a
reference to the Kadena `coin` KDA token module, because `coin` implements
`fungible-v2`. Of course there is nothing special about `fungible-v2`: modrefs
can specify any defined interface and accept any module that implements said
interface.

> In this way, modrefs bring polymorphism to Pact. To programmers coming from
> polymorphic languages like Javascript, Java or Python, module references may
> look familiar. However, Pact is very much not object-oriented so there are
> important differences in how polymorphism works and what it is best used for.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this way, modrefs bring polymorphism to Pact. To programmers coming from
object-oriented languages that support polymorphism like Javascript, Java or Python,
module references may look familiar. However, Pact is very much not object-oriented
so there are important differences in how polymorphism works and what it is best used for.
```

Author: Rewrote the section

A key difference is that while modrefs allow polymorphism over modules, they
don't offer polymorphism over data. Modules in Pact are not data in any
practical sense: not only are they "code only", but they cannot be dynamically

> created within the Pact system.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I'm understanding what is meant by "polymorphism over data" here. (Maybe it's my functional programming background!). Modules in Pact are not data, and cannot be dynamically created. Yet a reference to a module lets you call functions or reference constants from that module; calling a function like `add` may change the internal state of the tables associated with that module. Would you mind clarifying what you're calling out here?

Author: See my comment below.

Author: Rewrote the section

Meanwhile, data stored in the database is managed using schemas, which have no
polymorphic features via modrefs or any other mechanism. This is why we suggest

> modrefs are more about "interoperation" instead of polymorphism per se, avoiding

Reviewer 2: The length of this section about differences from standard object-oriented polymorphism makes me think that the word 'polymorphism' may be leading us somewhat astray. Perhaps 'generics' is a term in common use that more closely describes the purpose of module references? I think generics are understood to be about abstraction via an interface, and the ability to call functions / methods from that interface, without the same object-oriented baggage that seems to be associated with 'polymorphism'.

Author: I might be trying too hard. My goal was to say "see OO-ers, this isn't the polymorphism you're looking for" by saying that data objects in pact don't gain any polymorphism through modrefs that they're used to, because in OO objects function as both code and data.

Author: Sadly I can't find any literature that really nails down the differences between generics, parametric polymorphism, or ad-hoc polymorphism. Generics really have a language-specific meaning, where in C++ and Haskell it's codegen, but in Java it's adding type variables to interface declarations and leveraging OO polymorphism (subtyping) to get the job done.

Reviewer 2: I went on that journey myself earlier today :laughing:. I think that it's OK to focus on what modrefs provide and not bother drawing a distinction between the abstraction / polymorphism provided by modrefs vs. standard object-oriented programming. I would expect someone reading the Pact reference would know they're not in OO world anymore.

That could certainly be useful to write up elsewhere, but for the reference it felt like an unexpected digression.

Reviewer 2: I guess Rust decided to sidestep the whole issue with "traits", so we have yet another word in the parlance to deal with!
https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-02-traits.html

Reviewer 4: Not sure how much we want to add references to more familiar languages, but for the javascript community, a parallel can be drawn between `types` of typescript (which @alber70g probably can explain better than I can)

Author: I reworked the section, please take a look! Thanks @thomashoneyman for the Rust example and @EnoF for the typescript, I mentioned both :)

the object-oriented connotation of "objects changing shape". Modrefs allow modules to
"interoperate with each other".

Additionally, programmers should resist the urge to employ other object-oriented
patterns using modrefs. A popular idea of "coding around interfaces, not
implementations" is actually harmful in Pact if polymorphism is not
needed. Programmers should prefer direct references whenever possible as they
are not only faster but safer, as Pact aggressively and permanently inlines all
directly-referenced code in the interests of code stability.

### Important concerns when using modrefs.

#### Late Binding

> As of Pact 4.7, modrefs are "late-binding", which means that the latest

Reviewer 2: Was this different prior to 4.7? If this is meant as a kind of "at the time of writing..." then I feel like it should be removed

upgraded version of a module will be used when a module operation is invoked.

Consider a modref to a module stored in the database when the module is
at version 1. Sometime later the module is upgraded to version 2. The modref
in the database will refer to the upgraded version 2 of the module when read
back in and used.

As described in the [Dependency Management](#dependency-management) section,
Pact direct references are not late-binding, so this modref behavior might
be surprising. "Pinned modrefs" that bind eagerly to the module version is
being actively considered as an upcoming Pact change to extend the benefits of

> dependency management to modrefs.

Reviewer 4: Not sure if we want to provide an example of how one could `modref` to a pinned module in the docs, but one could create a simple wrapper like:

```pact
(module coin-v5-pin G
  (use coin) ; pin to latest coin or use hash
  (defcap G() (enforce false "Can not upgrade"))
  
  (defun get-coin:module{fungible-v2}() coin)) ; or implement fungible and wrap all modules 
```

Author: Dunno, maybe I should just take this out and we'll just ship pins in the next release and update the docs.

#### Modrefs introduce untrusted code

As modrefs introduce the ability to call code unknown at compile time, this
means that **any modref call should be treated as untrusted code**. Thus
programmers should avoid invoking modrefs when a sensitive capability is in
scope, as it will make "private capability functions" callable by the modref,

> when normally this would not be possible.

Reviewer 2: What is the difference between calling something like this, versus via the modref below? Is there a difference in how the capability scope is handled?

```pact
(defun collect-data (account:string)
  (with-capability (COLLECT)
    (store-data (my-collector-module.collect))
    (pay-fee account)))
```

Author: This code is not polymorphic/generic -- that is a static link to `my-collector-module` which is present at compile time. Thus the programmer knows what will happen. With a modref this cannot be known.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, my question wasn't clear. I'm aware that the example I gave uses a static link whereas the example and the docs are talking about a reference, in which the programmer has no advance knowledge of the implementation they are calling.

The only reason the modref is unsafe, then, is that the programmer cannot know in advance what it will do? The reason I asked if there was any difference in the way the capability is handled is due to this line:

> it will make "private capability functions" callable by the modref, when normally this would not be possible.

I am trying to think of why a modref would be able to call 'private capability functions' but a static link cannot. Is it because a module reference can refer to a module defined after the calling module, and therefore can refer statically to the calling module? For example:

```pact
(interface data-collector
  (defun collect ()))

(module my-module GOV
  (defun collect-data (collector:module{data-collector} account:string)
    (with-capability (COLLECT)
      ;; UNSAFE
      (store-data (collector::collect))
      (pay-fee account)))

  (defun pay-fee (account:string)
    (require-capability (COLLECT))
    (coin.transfer FEE_BANK account FEE))
)

(module my-collector GOV
  (implements data-collector)

  ;; Because this module is deployed after `my-module`, it is able to
  ;; call `pay-fee` directly — and with the (COLLECT) cap, due to the
  ;; unsafe implementation of `collect-data`
  (defun collect ()
    (my-module.pay-fee))
)
```

Author: > The only reason the modref is unsafe, then, is that the programmer cannot know in advance what it will do?

Yes. Perhaps the use case needs to be clarified that in this "collector" example, users provide collector implementations which are sampled for data, and the user gets paid a fee. Thus if a collector was able to call `pay-fee` multiple times, this would be an exploit, as the contract is design to pay once-per-collection. 

If that was not clear then I can add some explanation when introducing the example.

Reviewer 2: I think the part I wanted clarification on is why, exactly, a modref means that private capability functions can be called, when they can't otherwise be called. Why is a modref a problem but a static link is not? And it seems like the answer isn't just that the programmer can't know in advance what the modref's implementation will do but more specifically that, among the unknown things it might do, it can call `pay-fee` as much as it wants (which would be an exploit). In contrast, a static link can't do that.

Or perhaps I'm misunderstanding and a statically-referenced module _could_ do that, but at least you can go look at the code and make sure it doesn't, which you can't do with a modref. I just wanted to be clear on which of these it is: in this scenario, either:

* a modref can end up calling private capability functions but a static link could not, or
* both a modref or a static link could call private capability functions but at least with a static link you can manually verify the code does not

Author: > At least, that's what I thought was implied by the sentence "it will make "private capability functions" callable by the modref, when normally this would not be possible."

Right. Yes, statically-linked code can also call `pay-fee` if it were invoked like your example. It would be a pretty gross thing to do and probably a bug, but due to how capabilities currently work, it would not be illegal. 

The vulnerability here is that you might have written airtight bug-free code, and then an external actor could take advantage of the putatively harmless modref call and exploit this weirdness in a way you didn't expect. Indeed we have seen this exploit happen in the wild, which motivated writing this section.

 We have been discussing whether it would make sense to simply prevent any external call to a function that calls `require-capability` in order to make this exploit impossible. It would also clear up the confusion you're having, which is that in fact no, the capability system currently does NOT prevent an external call to a protected defun; the entire mechanism is guarded by restricting what code can bring it into scope (with `with-capability`), but once it's in scope, all bets are off.

So the argument is we could be opinionated/paternalistic and just forbid ever calling functions having `require-capability` from outside the module. The worry is that this would defeat some valid use-cases. If we could get confidence to do this I think the security model would be considerably tighter and this class of exploit would vanish.

In the meantime, I will rework the intro to make clear that there isn't such a mechanism to avoid this confusion.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the clarification. I think this example would not have thrown me if it made clear that within `with-capability` function calls can access otherwise private functions — which I knew — but while with a static link you can verify that the code is harmless, with a modref you cannot, and so you are opening yourself up to exploits. The phrasing made me think there was a difference with regards to capabilities between the two.

Author: LOL @jwiegley points out that you normally can't do that because of the circular dependency. In your example above, `my-collector-module` has to be defined first before this module, so it cannot have code that calls `pay-fee` because this module doesn't exist yet.

You can tie this knot with upgrades and time travel but most people wouldn't. Thus a pact-er would never do this normally because of Pact's strictness.

Reviewer 2: That's what I was getting at here: https://github.com/kadena-io/pact/pull/1256#discussion_r1279818566

> I am trying to think of why a modref would be able to call 'private capability functions' but a static link cannot. Is it because a module reference can refer to a module defined after the calling module, and then that module can refer statically back to the calling module? For example:

I thought this was the reason why the modref was unsafe but the static link is safe.

Author: Reworked the section, hopefully it's clearer now

Consider a module with a public function `collect-data` that is safe to call,
and a private function `pay-fee` that is not intended to be invoked outside the
module, guarded by the capability `COLLECT`. If a modref is invoked while the
`COLLECT` capability is in scope, the calling code will be able to call the
sensitive function directly.

```lisp
;; BAD CODE -- don't do this!
(defun collect-data (collector:module{data-collector} account:string)
  (with-capability (COLLECT)
    ;; BAD: modref invoked inside of with-capability call
    (store-data (collector::collect))
    (pay-fee account)))

(defun pay-fee (account:string)
  (require-capability (COLLECT))
  (coin.transfer FEE_BANK account FEE))
```

In the above code, `pay-fee` is intended to run once. But because the
`collector:module{data-collector}` modref is invoked **inside of the capability
acquisition**, the modref code in `collect` now has elevated privilege to
directly call `pay-fee`. Thus a malicious actor can craft a version of `collect`
thatn can directly call `pay-fee` as many times as they like.

Fortunately, this is easily avoided by keeping modref calls out of scope of the
sensitive capability.

> 

Reviewer 4: Is it not cheaper and easier to understand if we would just tell them to execute the `store-data` outside of the `with-capability` as well?

```pact
;; SAFE CODE -- do this!
(defun collect-data (collector:module{data-collector} account:string)
  ;; GOOD: modref invoked outside of with-capability call
  (store-data (collector::collect))
  (with-capability (COLLECT)
    (pay-fee account))))
```

Or does invoking it like this have different implications when the capability cannot be acquired?

Author: It's a made-up example, I just wanted to show the code doing _something_ with the results of the collector call. Presumably `store-data` is a sensitive call too (you wouldn't want someone making that call top-level). But this is the problem with throwing examples out without a massive section detailing them. I'm rewriting the intro to this so I'll try to clarify.

```lisp
;; SAFE CODE -- do this!
(defun collect-data (collector:module{data-collector} account:string)
  ;; GOOD: modref invoked outside of with-capability call
  (let ((data (collector::collect)))
    (with-capability (COLLECT)
      (store-data data)
      (pay-fee account))))
```

Now, the modref call has safely returned before the capability is acquired,
meaning a malicious implementation has no elevated privileges allowing it

> to call sensitive code.

Reviewer 2: I'm really happy to see this included as part of the new documentation. Thanks for including it with a clear example!

patterns using modrefs. A popular idea of "coding around interfaces, not
implementations" is actually harmful in Pact if polymorphism is not
needed. Programmers should prefer direct references whenever possible as they
are not only faster but safer, as Pact aggressively and permanently inlines all
directly-referenced code in the interests of code stability.

### Important concerns when using modrefs.

Modrefs are late-binding, which means that the latest version of a module will
always be used when a module operation is invoked, in contrast with direct
bindings which permanently reference the bound module version. _TODO here I
would like to mention that we're going to be pinning modrefs in an upcoming
release_.

As modrefs introduce the ability to call code unknown at compile time, this
means that **any modref call should be treated as untrusted code**. Thus
programmers should avoid invoking modrefs when a sensitive capability is in
scope, as it will make "private capability functions" callable by the modref,
when normally this would not be possible. _TODO here I would like to note that
we are going to prevent functions with `require-capability` from being called

> top-level to close this hole_.

Reviewer: If we add that guard, does it remove this whole paragraph, or should users still exercise caution for other reasons as well?

Author: It's not totally clear that we can actually do that without blowing up some valid use-cases, so I'm punting on that and instead describing the vulnerability better.

can specify any defined interface and accept any module that implements said
interface.

> The polymorphism offered by modrefs resembles Generics in Java or Traits in Rust,

Reviewer 2: I don't think generics or traits are usually capitalized. For example, the Rust docs state:

> We can use traits to define shared behavior in an abstract way.

Or from the Oracle docs for Java

> Let's test your understanding of generics. Is the following code snippet legal?

```suggestion
The polymorphism offered by modrefs resembles generics in Java or traits in Rust,
```

and should not be confused with more object-oriented polymorphism like that found

> with Java classes or Typescript types. Modules cannot "extend" one another, they

Reviewer 2: TypeScript is spelled with a capital 'S' (see [the language homepage](https://www.typescriptlang.org/))

```suggestion
with Java classes or TypeScript types. Modules cannot "extend" one another, they
```

can only offer operations that match some interface specification, and interfaces

> themselves cannot extend some other interface.

Reviewer 2: I think this is a much clearer paragraph now :+1:

of a fee. The foreign modules implement `data-collector` which offers `collect`
to get the data, and `get-fee-recipient` to identify the receiving account.
The module code acquires the `COLLECT` capability, and uses this to prevent
two delegate functions from being called directly. Unfortunately, with
the wrong code, this seemingly benign code can be exploited by a malicious modref
implementor.

```lisp
(module data-market GOVERNANCE
  ...

  (defun collect-data (collector:module{data-collector})
    "Provide data, get paid!"
    ;; BAD: capability acquired before modref calls
    (with-capability (COLLECT)
      ;; BAD: modref invoked with capability in scope!
      (store-data (collector::collect))
      (pay-fee (collector::get-fee-recipient)))

  (defun pay-fee (account:string)
    "Private function to pay one-time fee for collection"
    (require-capability (COLLECT))
    (coin.transfer FEE_BANK account FEE))

  (defun store-data (data:object{data-schema})
    "Private function to update database with data collection results"
    (require-capability (COLLECT))
    ...)

```

The problem with the above code is that the `with-capability` call happens

> _before_ the calls to the modref operations, such that while the foreign module

Reviewer 2: I like the 'foreign module' terminology.
